.TH fuservicemount3 "8"
.SH NAME
fuservicemount3 \- mount a FUSE filesystem that runs as a system socket service
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fuservicemount3
.B source
.B mountpoint
.BI -t " fstype"
[
.BI -o " options"
]

.B fuservicemount3
.BI -t " fstype"
.B --check

.SH DESCRIPTION
Mount a filesystem using a FUSE server that runs as a socket service.
Unlike a traditional FUSE filesystem, which runs in the mount caller's
context, such a server runs as an independent, sandboxed systemd service.
\fBfuservicemount3\fP connects to the per-type service socket, hands the
running server the \fI/dev/fuse\fP device and any backing files it needs,
and performs the mount on its behalf. These servers can therefore be
contained using the platform's service management framework.
.PP
\fBfuservicemount3\fP is installed setuid root so that unprivileged users
can mount filesystems handled by a service. It is normally invoked
indirectly by \fBmount.fuse3\fP(8), not run directly.
.PP
The second form checks whether a FUSE service is available for the given
filesystem type, without mounting anything.
.SH FILESYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
This is not a transparent wrapper for arbitrary FUSE programs. Only a
filesystem whose server is written to the libfuse service API can be mounted
this way. A conventional server that calls \fBfuse_main\fP(3) opens
\fI/dev/fuse\fP and performs the mount itself, which the service sandbox does
not permit, so it cannot be used unmodified.
.PP
A service-capable server instead:
.IP \- 2
accepts the listening socket that systemd hands it, and receives its
arguments and the \fI/dev/fuse\fP descriptor over that socket, rather than
opening the device itself;
.IP \- 2
asks the helper to open any backing files or block devices on its behalf,
because its sandbox has no direct filesystem access; and
.IP \- 2
lets the helper perform the mount, staying in the foreground under systemd.
.PP
The server binary, its \fB@.service\fP unit, and its \fB.socket\fP unit must
all be installed before the type can be mounted. See \fBEXAMPLES\fP below, the
\fIservice_ll.c\fP and \fIservice_hl.c\fP example servers, the
\fI<fuse_service.h>\fP header, and the \fIREADME.service-mount-dev\fP document
for how to build one.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B source
The filesystem source, passed on to the running server (for example a
backing device or file). May be empty.
.TP
.B mountpoint
Where to mount the filesystem.
.TP
.BI -t " fstype"
The filesystem type, of the form \fBfuse.\fIsubtype\fR or
\fBfuseblk.\fIsubtype\fR. The \fIsubtype\fR selects the service socket.
.TP
.BI -o " options"
Mount options to forward to the server.
.TP
.B --check
Only test whether a service socket exists for the type given with \fB-t\fP;
do not mount. Exit status is zero if a socket is present, non-zero
otherwise. This does not verify that a server actually answers.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /run/filesystems/<subtype>
The default location of the per-filesystem service socket. The directory is
configurable at build time (meson option \fBservice-socket-dir\fP).
.SH EXAMPLES
A complete walk-through using the \fIservice_ll\fP example filesystem that
ships with libfuse.
.SS "What it is for"
\fIservice_ll\fP exports a single file or block device as a one-file
filesystem. Running it as a service keeps the server inside a systemd sandbox
\(em its own unprivileged user, private namespaces, and no capabilities \(em
while still letting a permitted user mount it with an ordinary \fBmount\fP
command. The privileged work (opening the backing device and calling
\fBmount\fP(2)) is done only by the setuid \fBfuservicemount3\fP helper. The
same recipe applies to any server written with the libfuse service API.
.SS "Setting up the service (administrator, once)"
The source for this example ships with the libfuse distribution in its
\fIexample\fP directory: \fIservice_ll.c\fP together with its helper
\fIsingle_file.c\fP make up the server, and \fIservice_ll@.service\fP and
\fIservice_ll.socket\fP are its systemd units. From that directory, build the
server and install the binary on the root filesystem:
.PP
.RS
.nf
gcc -Wall single_file.c service_ll.c $(pkg-config fuse3 --cflags --libs) -o service_ll
sudo install -m 0755 service_ll /usr/local/sbin/service_ll
.fi
.RE
.PP
libfuse provides two systemd units for this example: \fIservice_ll@.service\fP
(the sandboxed server) and \fIservice_ll.socket\fP (the activation socket,
already configured to listen at \fI/run/filesystems/service_ll\fP). Edit the
service unit's \fBExecStart\fP to point at the installed binary:
.PP
.RS
.nf
ExecStart=/usr/local/sbin/service_ll
.fi
.RE
.PP
Install both units, reload systemd, and start the socket:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sudo cp service_ll@.service service_ll.socket /run/systemd/system/
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl start service_ll.socket
.fi
.RE
.PP
Only the socket is running now; systemd starts a fresh, isolated server
instance on demand for each mount.
.SS "Mounting and using it"
Confirm a service is available for the type (this prints nothing; the exit
status is the answer):
.PP
.RS
.nf
fuservicemount3 -t fuse.service_ll --check && echo available
.fi
.RE
.PP
Mount it, passing the backing device or file as the source. Run this as root
or from an \fI/etc/fstab\fP entry that permits the mount:
.PP
.RS
.nf
mount -t fuse.service_ll /dev/sda /mnt
.fi
.RE
.PP
\fBmount.fuse3\fP(8) notices the service, \fBfuservicemount3\fP opens
\fI/dev/sda\fP and performs the mount, and the data appears under \fI/mnt\fP.
Unmount it like any other FUSE filesystem:
.PP
.RS
.nf
fusermount3 -u /mnt
.fi
.RE
.PP
For the full hardened unit files and further detail, see the
\fIservice_ll@.service\fP and \fIservice_ll.socket\fP files shipped with
libfuse and the \fIREADME.service-mount\fP document.
.SH "AUTHORS"
.LP
The author of the fuse socket service code is Darrick J. Wong <djwong@kernel.org>.
Debian GNU/Linux distribution.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mount.fuse3 (8)
.BR fusermount3 (1)
.BR fusermount (1)
.BR mount (8)
.BR fuse (4)
.BR systemd.socket (5)
